---
title: 'Structuring a jekyll theme'
summary: "How to plan for and use a structure for your theme"
tags: jekyll blog
layout: post
id: 2
---

<header>
<h1>
	<a href="#">Structuring a jekyll theme</a>
</h1>

<p>How to plan for and use a structure for your theme</p>

<nav>
	<ol>
		<li>[Index file](#Index-file)</li>
		<li>[Posts](#Posts)</li>
		<li>[Conclusion](#Conclusion)</li>
	</ol>
</nav>
</header>

## Index file

This is the starting point of your site or blog. There's not much to talk about for this page. The page itself shouldn't contain much aside from some [YAML][0] front matter.

{%raw %}
    ---
    title: Home
    layout: index
    ---
{% endraw %}

Everything that you see on, for example my [landing page][1] isn't generated in `\index.html`. Rather, it's generated in `_layouts\index.html`. This separation of content
from layouts is very similar to what you might see in a <abbr title="Model View Controller">MVC</abbr>-oriented framework.

Additionally, actual content isn't output in our layout either. The layout only determines in which, and in what order, layouts should be included.

{% raw %}
    {% include header.html %}
	    {% include index.html %}
    {% include footer.html %}
{% endraw %}

There's 3 includes to take note of here:

1. **header.html**<br />
Contains the header element and everything associated with this. Also starts the `html` and `body` elements.

2. **footer.html**<br />
Pulls in any javascript and finishes the `html` and `body` elements.

3. **index.html** <br />
Generates and output content.

The `index` include isn't very big and should be more or less self-explanatory

{% raw %}
    {% assign link = true %}

    {% for post in site.posts %}
        <article>
            {% include preview.html %}
        </article>
    {% endfor %}
{% endraw %}

All it does is enumerate the last 10 posts on the site and includes `preview.html`, which expects a variable named `post` to be set and assigned a post object.
`preview.html` is very simple:

{% raw %}
    <h1>
        {% if link %}
            <a href="{{ post.url }}" title="{{ post.title }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
        {% else %}
            {{ post.title }}
        {% endif %}
    </h1>

    <p>
        {{ post.summary }}
    </p>
{% endraw %}

And finally, this is where things are output and actually rendered. Setting a variable named `link` to anything but `false` or `null` will render the `h1`-element as a link.

The reason why I pulled out `preview.html` instead of writing the markup directly in the post-loop in (the include) `index.html` is because I want my theme to be as modular and
atomic as possible.

Anytime I want a preview (wherever that might be) I can just assign a variable named `post` with the correct data and `{%raw%}{% include preview.html %}{%endraw%}` and it should work <abbr title="Out Of the Box">OOB</abbr>.

## Posts

The structure and flow for rendering of single post pages isn't much different.
Probably the biggest difference is the entry point to the layout. In any post I want rendered with the `post` layout, I use

{% raw %}
    ---
    ...
    layout: post
    ---
{% endraw %}

Now, in the layout `post.html` there's 3 files included

{% raw %}
    {% include header.html %}
        {% include post.html %}
    {% include footer.html %}
{% endraw %}

The first and last are included in every layout for obvious reasons, the middle one though is different:

{% raw %}
    <article>

        {% assign post = page %}
        {% include preview.html %}

        {{ content }}
    </article>
{% endraw %}

Here you see why I pulled out `preview.html` as a separate module.
Since `preview.html` requires a `post` variable assigned a post object, we assign `post` to `page` (which is the current post object).
Finally, since we don't assign anything to `link`, we won't get our `h1` as a link.

## Conclusion

This work, together with learning the syntax of liquid, took me about a day in effective time. As far as I'm concerned, that's very, *very* little time for setting up a whole site, even a static one.

***This post is one in a series of posts on building a site with [Jekyll][0]. These are the articles I have written so far, in no particular order:***
{% assign list-tag = "jekyll" %}
{% include list_tag_articles.html %}

[0]: http://yaml.org/
[1]: /
[2]: http://jekyllrb.com/
