---
title: 'Recruitment test'
summary: "Solving the recruitment test from Multisoft Solutions"
tags: test recruitment
layout: post
id: 3
---

<header>
<h1>
	<a href="#">Recruitment test</a>
</h1>

<p>Solving the recruitment test from Multisoft Solutions</p>

<nav>
	<ol>
		<li>[Background](#Background)</li>
		<li>[Problem](#Problem)</li>
		<li>[Solution](#Solution)</li>
	</ol>
</nav>
</header>

## Background

A couple of days ago (read: early new years eve) I looked through a couple of job ads on (the very ugly) [vakanser.se][5] website and stumbled upon (ergh) an [ad][2] from swedish firm [Multisoft Solutions][1]. While pondering over the solution I thought to myself "hey, why not put it on [there][0]". Said and done, here it is:

## Problem

Imagine the following procedure in [T-SQL][3]:

	CREATE PROCEDURE dbo.ObscureProcedure
        @i int
	AS
	BEGIN
	    SELECT
		    CASE
		        WHEN @i < 193 THEN
                    COUNT(*) * @i
                ELSE
                    COUNT(*) * 193
            END AS ObscureCount
        FROM
            VacationGadget
        WHERE
            @i < 886
	END

The logic should be simple enough to follow.

The task at hand, is to figure what the following code would return:

	long sum = 0;
	for (int i = 0; i < 891; i++)
	{
	    sum += GetIntFromSQL("EXEC dbo.ObscureProcedure @i = " + i.ToString());
	}

	return sum;

*Side note: That piece of code is horrible. Never, ever do something like it. Thank you.

Now, running the following statement (in the sql server):

	EXEC dbo.ObscureProcedure @i = 496

Would give you the answer

	ObscureCount
	------------
	1999287

	(1 row(s) affected)

## Solution

Now, thing is, they've pretty much already given us the answer. The steps from here to a solution is pretty clear:

1. **Convert** the SQL procedure into a function

2. **Test** the function

3. **??**

4. **Profit** (or not..)

Let's start with the test. Set this up in a unit test (I used nunit, but use whatever you want):

    Assert.AreEqual(1999287, dbo.ObscureProcedure(496));

This (of course) will fail the first time it's run, but worry not. We'll soon make it spew green into your eyes.
Since the procedure uses `COUNT(*)` we need to calculate the number of rows the table's got. Our procedure doesn't use `@i` unless
it's `lt` 193 so we need to `1999287 / 193` which'll give us `10359`.

The next step in our path to glory would be tracing the control flow in the procedure, and rebuild it (in your language of choice):

    public static int ObscureProcedure(int i)
    {
        const int rows = 10359 //remember?

        if (i >= 886) //WHERE @i < 886
            return 0;

        if (i < 193) //CASE WHEN @i < 193 THEN COUNT(*) * @i
            return rows * i;
        else
            return rows * 193;
    }

And that should be pretty self-explanatory. Simply put:

1. The **WHERE** clause in SQL must be evaluated first since that's what the SQL server does

2. **Continue** as in the original procedure

That's it. You could probably do things in another way, like using a switch-case and some clever subtraction or multiplication. But why bother? Besides, using stuff like that in production environments would just be stupid. But if you do, you should probably switch [profession][4].

[0]: /
[1]: multisoft.se
[2]: http://www.multisoft.se/softadmin.aspx?id=11&menuid=ST16
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-sql
[4]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zxxM9EYQzY
[5]: http://vakanser.se/
